README.md, before:

# rate-limit-starter

Spring Boot rate-limit starter with fingerprint-based throttling, Redis TTL counters, and per-endpoint rules.

## Features
- Per-endpoint rate limits with Ant-style path patterns.
- Multi-key limits (fingerprint, identifiers, IP, user-agent).
- Redis-backed counters with Caffeine in-memory fallback.
- Request context filter to capture IP and user-agent.
- Risk-aware decisions and on-limit actions (block, challenge, alert).
- Alert listeners via webhook HTTP POST or SMTP email.

## Installation
```gradle
dependencies {
    implementation "com.khaounen:rate-limit-starter:1.0.1"
}
```

## Usage
The starter auto-configures itself when on the classpath.

Configure limits in `application.yml`:

```yaml
rate-limit:
  enabled: true
  apply-default-to-all: true
  defaults:
    window-seconds: 60
    max-requests: 300
    block-seconds: 300
    authenticated-multiplier: 3
  endpoints:
    - path: /users/login
      window-seconds: 60
      max-requests: 5
      block-seconds: 900
      on-limit-action: ALERT
      key-types: [FINGERPRINT, IDENTIFIER, IP]
      identifier-params:
        - username
```

## Filter Order
The starter registers two filters in the Spring Security chain:
- `RequestContextFilter`: runs early (before auth) to capture IP and User-Agent.
- `RateLimitFilter`: runs after auth so it can apply `authenticated-multiplier`.

This ordering ensures the fingerprint is always available, and authenticated users can benefit from higher limits.

## Configuration Reference

Top-level:
- `rate-limit.enabled` (boolean): enable or disable the limiter.
- `rate-limit.apply-default-to-all` (boolean): apply `defaults` to all requests not explicitly listed.
- `rate-limit.defaults`: base rule applied when `apply-default-to-all` is true.
- `rate-limit.endpoints`: list of endpoint-specific rules.

Rule fields:
- `path` (string): Ant-style path pattern.
- `methods` (list): restrict by HTTP method. Empty = all.
- `window-seconds` (int): time window in seconds.
- `max-requests` (int): max requests per window.
- `block-seconds` (int): block duration after exceeding the limit.
- `authenticated-multiplier` (int): multiplier when user is authenticated.
- `apply-authenticated-multiplier` (boolean): disable multiplier for sensitive endpoints (OTP/signup).
- `on-limit-action` (string): `BLOCK` (default), `CHALLENGE`, `ALERT`, `BLOCK_AND_ALERT`, or `ALERT_ONLY`.
- `alert-once-per-block` (boolean): when `BLOCK_AND_ALERT`, emit only one alert per block window (default true).
- `alert-cooldown-seconds` (int): minimum time between alerts per key; overrides block window if larger.
- `risk-score` (int): base score added for this endpoint (e.g. login/otp).
- `risk-medium-threshold` (int): score threshold for `MEDIUM`.
- `risk-high-threshold` (int): score threshold for `HIGH`.
- `risk-window-seconds` (int): rolling window for incident count aggregation.
- `key-types` (list): any of `FINGERPRINT`, `IDENTIFIER`, `IP`, `USER_AGENT`.
- `identifier-params` (list): request params or JSON fields used as secondary key (email/phone/username).
- `identifier-header` (string): header used as secondary key.
- `key` (string): custom Redis key prefix for the rule.
- `key-suffix` (string): suffix appended to the key (useful for grouping).

Notes:
- Counters use `rate:count:*` with TTL = `window-seconds`.
- Blocks use `rate:block:*` with TTL = `block-seconds`.
- Redis is used when a RedisTemplate bean is present; otherwise Caffeine in-memory caches are used.
- Caffeine entries expire per entry (window or block duration), preventing unbounded growth in local mode.

## Key Types Behavior
- If `key-types` is empty, defaults to `FINGERPRINT` + `IDENTIFIER` (if any).
- Each key type is evaluated separately (OR): any key exceeding the limit blocks/alerts the request.
- `USER_AGENT` is ignored unless `IP` or `FINGERPRINT` is also present to avoid false positives from shared UAs.
- The default fingerprint already mixes IP + User-Agent (see `DefaultFingerPrint`), so you usually do not need `USER_AGENT` as a key.

Examples:
```yaml
rate-limit:
  endpoints:
    # Default behavior: fingerprint + identifier
    - path: /users/login
      identifier-params: [username]

    # Explicit multi-key: IP + identifier
    - path: /users/send-otp
      key-types: [IP, IDENTIFIER]
      identifier-params: [phone]

    # UA counted only if IP or fingerprint is also present
    - path: /abuse/signal
      key-types: [FINGERPRINT, USER_AGENT]
```

## Custom Fingerprint
Provide your own strategy:

```java
@Bean
public FingerprintStrategy fingerprintStrategy() {
    return request -> "custom-fingerprint";
}
```

## Alerting (Webhook / SMTP)
Alerts fire when `on-limit-action: ALERT` is configured on a rule.

Webhook:
```yaml
rate-limit:
  alert:
    webhook:
      enabled: true
      url: https://your-webhook.example/ratelimit
      connect-timeout-ms: 1000
      timeout-ms: 2000
      include-context: true
  endpoints:
    - path: /users/login
      on-limit-action: BLOCK_AND_ALERT
      alert-once-per-block: true
      alert-cooldown-seconds: 900
```

SMTP:
```yaml
rate-limit:
  alert:
    smtp:
      enabled: true
      from: "security@your-domain.com"
      to:
        - "ops@your-domain.com"
      subject: "Rate limit alert"
      include-context: true
spring:
  mail:
    host: smtp.example.com
    port: 587
    username: your-user
    password: your-pass
    properties:
      mail.smtp.auth: true
      mail.smtp.starttls.enable: true
```

## Challenge Handling
For `on-limit-action: CHALLENGE`, the default handler returns a `403` with "Captcha required.".
You can override this behavior by providing a `RateLimitChallengeHandler` bean.

## Risk Evaluation
The starter computes a risk score per decision using a `RiskEvaluator`. The default evaluator:
- adds a base `risk-score` from the rule
- increases score on block/challenge/alert
- increases score when the same key is throttled repeatedly within `risk-window-seconds`

Example tuning:
```yaml
rate-limit:
  endpoints:
    - path: /users/login
      on-limit-action: BLOCK_AND_ALERT
      risk-score: 30
      risk-medium-threshold: 50
      risk-high-threshold: 80
      risk-window-seconds: 3600
```

## On-limit Actions (Detailed)
- `BLOCK`: over-limit requests are blocked (429) and counted as incidents.
- `CHALLENGE`: over-limit requests return a challenge response (403) and are counted as incidents.
- `ALERT`: over-limit requests are allowed, an alert is emitted, and incidents are tracked.
- `BLOCK_AND_ALERT`: over-limit requests are blocked (429) and an alert is emitted; incidents are tracked.
- `ALERT_ONLY`: over-limit requests are allowed, an alert is emitted, and incident tracking is skipped (risk stays closer to the base `risk-score`).
Alerting notes:
- With `BLOCK_AND_ALERT` and `alert-once-per-block: true`, an alert is emitted only once per block window per key.
- Set `alert-cooldown-seconds` to avoid email storms when users keep retrying.

Provide your own evaluator:
```java
@Bean
public RiskEvaluator riskEvaluator() {
    return (rule, ctx, decision, incidentCount) -> {
        if (incidentCount >= 5) return RiskLevel.HIGH;
        if (incidentCount >= 2) return RiskLevel.MEDIUM;
        return RiskLevel.LOW;
    };
}
```

## Publishing
Releases are published by pushing a tag like `v1.0.0`.
The GitHub Actions workflow publishes to Maven Central (Central Portal).

Required GitHub secrets:
- `MAVEN_CENTRAL_USERNAME`
- `MAVEN_CENTRAL_PASSWORD`
- `MAVEN_SIGNING_KEY` (ASCII-armored PGP private key)
- `MAVEN_SIGNING_PASSWORD`

Local publish:
```bash
./gradlew publishToMavenLocal -PreleaseVersion=1.0.0
```

Manual Central publish:
```bash
./gradlew publishToMavenCentral -PreleaseVersion=1.0.0
```

## License
Apache-2.0

Commit message:

resolve fingerprint from Authentication when user is authenticated

README.md, after:

# rate-limit-starter

Spring Boot rate-limit starter with fingerprint-based throttling, Redis TTL counters, and per-endpoint rules.

## Features
- Per-endpoint rate limits with Ant-style path patterns.
- Multi-key limits (fingerprint, identifiers, IP, user-agent).
- Redis-backed counters with Caffeine in-memory fallback.
- Request context filter to capture IP and user-agent.
- Risk-aware decisions and on-limit actions (block, challenge, alert).
- Alert listeners via webhook HTTP POST or SMTP email.

## Compatibility
- Java 17+
- Spring Boot 3.x

## Installation
```gradle
dependencies {
    implementation "com.khaounen:rate-limit-starter:1.0.1"
}
```

## Usage
The starter auto-configures itself when on the classpath.

Configure limits in `application.yml`:

```yaml
rate-limit:
  enabled: true
  apply-default-to-all: true
  defaults:
    window-seconds: 60
    max-requests: 300
    block-seconds: 300
    authenticated-multiplier: 3
  endpoints:
    - path: /users/login
      window-seconds: 60
      max-requests: 5
      block-seconds: 900
      on-limit-action: ALERT
      key-types: [FINGERPRINT, IDENTIFIER, IP]
      identifier-params:
        - username
```

## Filter Order
The starter registers two filters in the Spring Security chain:
- `RequestContextFilter`: runs early (before auth) to capture IP and User-Agent.
- `RateLimitFilter`: runs after auth so it can apply `authenticated-multiplier`.

This ordering ensures the fingerprint is always available, and authenticated users can benefit from higher limits.
When a request is authenticated, the rate-limit fingerprint is derived from `Authentication.getName()` (e.g., JWT `sub`),
falling back to the request fingerprint for anonymous traffic.

## Configuration Reference

Top-level:
- `rate-limit.enabled` (boolean): enable or disable the limiter.
- `rate-limit.apply-default-to-all` (boolean): apply `defaults` to all requests not explicitly listed.
- `rate-limit.defaults`: base rule applied when `apply-default-to-all` is true.
- `rate-limit.endpoints`: list of endpoint-specific rules.

Rule fields:
- `path` (string): Ant-style path pattern.
- `methods` (list): restrict by HTTP method. Empty = all.
- `window-seconds` (int): time window in seconds.
- `max-requests` (int): max requests per window.
- `block-seconds` (int): block duration after exceeding the limit.
- `authenticated-multiplier` (int): multiplier when user is authenticated.
- `apply-authenticated-multiplier` (boolean): disable multiplier for sensitive endpoints (OTP/signup).
- `on-limit-action` (string): `BLOCK` (default), `CHALLENGE`, `ALERT`, `BLOCK_AND_ALERT`, or `ALERT_ONLY`.
- `alert-once-per-block` (boolean): when `BLOCK_AND_ALERT`, emit only one alert per block window (default true).
- `alert-cooldown-seconds` (int): minimum time between alerts per key; overrides block window if larger.
- `risk-score` (int): base score added for this endpoint (e.g. login/otp).
- `risk-medium-threshold` (int): score threshold for `MEDIUM`.
- `risk-high-threshold` (int): score threshold for `HIGH`.
- `risk-window-seconds` (int): rolling window for incident count aggregation.
- `key-types` (list): any of `FINGERPRINT`, `IDENTIFIER`, `IP`, `USER_AGENT`.
- `identifier-params` (list): request params or JSON fields used as secondary key (email/phone/username).
- `identifier-header` (string): header used as secondary key.
- `key` (string): custom Redis key prefix for the rule.
- `key-suffix` (string): suffix appended to the key (useful for grouping).

Notes:
- Counters use `rate:count:*` with TTL = `window-seconds`.
- Blocks use `rate:block:*` with TTL = `block-seconds`.
- Redis is used when a RedisTemplate bean is present; otherwise Caffeine in-memory caches are used.
- Caffeine entries expire per entry (window or block duration), preventing unbounded growth in local mode.

## Key Types Behavior
- If `key-types` is empty, defaults to `FINGERPRINT` + `IDENTIFIER` (if any).
- Each key type is evaluated separately (OR): any key exceeding the limit blocks/alerts the request.
- `USER_AGENT` is ignored unless `IP` or `FINGERPRINT` is also present to avoid false positives from shared UAs.
- The default fingerprint already mixes IP + User-Agent (see `DefaultFingerPrint`), so you usually do not need `USER_AGENT` as a key.

Examples:
```yaml
rate-limit:
  endpoints:
    # Default behavior: fingerprint + identifier
    - path: /users/login
      identifier-params: [username]

    # Explicit multi-key: IP + identifier
    - path: /users/send-otp
      key-types: [IP, IDENTIFIER]
      identifier-params: [phone]

    # UA counted only if IP or fingerprint is also present
    - path: /abuse/signal
      key-types: [FINGERPRINT, USER_AGENT]
```

## Custom Fingerprint
Provide your own strategy:

```java
@Bean
public FingerprintStrategy fingerprintStrategy() {
    return request -> "custom-fingerprint";
}
```

## Alerting (Webhook / SMTP)
Alerts fire when `on-limit-action: ALERT` is configured on a rule.

Webhook:
```yaml
rate-limit:
  alert:
    webhook:
      enabled: true
      url: https://your-webhook.example/ratelimit
      connect-timeout-ms: 1000
      timeout-ms: 2000
      include-context: true
  endpoints:
    - path: /users/login
      on-limit-action: BLOCK_AND_ALERT
      alert-once-per-block: true
      alert-cooldown-seconds: 900
```

SMTP:
```yaml
rate-limit:
  alert:
    smtp:
      enabled: true
      from: "security@your-domain.com"
      to:
        - "ops@your-domain.com"
      subject: "Rate limit alert"
      include-context: true
spring:
  mail:
    host: smtp.example.com
    port: 587
    username: your-user
    password: your-pass
    properties:
      mail.smtp.auth: true
      mail.smtp.starttls.enable: true
```

## Challenge Handling
For `on-limit-action: CHALLENGE`, the default handler returns a `403` with "Captcha required.".
You can override this behavior by providing a `RateLimitChallengeHandler` bean.

## Risk Evaluation
The starter computes a risk score per decision using a `RiskEvaluator`. The default evaluator:
- adds a base `risk-score` from the rule
- increases score on block/challenge/alert
- increases score when the same key is throttled repeatedly within `risk-window-seconds`

Example tuning:
```yaml
rate-limit:
  endpoints:
    - path: /users/login
      on-limit-action: BLOCK_AND_ALERT
      risk-score: 30
      risk-medium-threshold: 50
      risk-high-threshold: 80
      risk-window-seconds: 3600
```

## On-limit Actions (Detailed)
- `BLOCK`: over-limit requests are blocked (429) and counted as incidents.
- `CHALLENGE`: over-limit requests return a challenge response (403) and are counted as incidents.
- `ALERT`: over-limit requests are allowed, an alert is emitted, and incidents are tracked.
- `BLOCK_AND_ALERT`: over-limit requests are blocked (429) and an alert is emitted; incidents are tracked.
- `ALERT_ONLY`: over-limit requests are allowed, an alert is emitted, and incident tracking is skipped (risk stays closer to the base `risk-score`).
Alerting notes:
- With `BLOCK_AND_ALERT` and `alert-once-per-block: true`, an alert is emitted only once per block window per key.
- Set `alert-cooldown-seconds` to avoid email storms when users keep retrying.

Provide your own evaluator:
```java
@Bean
public RiskEvaluator riskEvaluator() {
    return (rule, ctx, decision, incidentCount) -> {
        if (incidentCount >= 5) return RiskLevel.HIGH;
        if (incidentCount >= 2) return RiskLevel.MEDIUM;
        return RiskLevel.LOW;
    };
}
```

## Publishing
Releases are published by pushing a tag like `v1.0.0`.
The GitHub Actions workflow publishes to Maven Central (Central Portal).

Required GitHub secrets:
- `MAVEN_CENTRAL_USERNAME`
- `MAVEN_CENTRAL_PASSWORD`
- `MAVEN_SIGNING_KEY` (ASCII-armored PGP private key)
- `MAVEN_SIGNING_PASSWORD`

Local publish:
```bash
./gradlew publishToMavenLocal -PreleaseVersion=1.0.0
```

Manual Central publish:
```bash
./gradlew publishToMavenCentral -PreleaseVersion=1.0.0
```

## License
Apache-2.0
